*Acknowledgement:

We would like to express our sincere gratitude to our project guide and faculty members for giving us the opportunity to work on the project titled “AI-Driven Medical Safety Assistant (MedSafe AI)”. Their guidance and encouragement helped us understand the practical aspects of applying programming concepts to solve real-world problems.
We are also thankful to our institution, CGC University Mohali, for providing the necessary resources and environment that allowed us to successfully complete this project.

* Index

1. Introduction 
2. Objective of project
3. Tools and technologies used
4. System Design
5. Implementation 
6. Code used
7. Advantages 
8. Limitations 
9. Future Improvements
10. Conclusion 

1. Introduction: 

With the increasing use of medicines, many people are unaware of possible drug interactions and basic symptom management. An AI-driven medical safety assistant can help users check medicine interactions and provide simple health guidance. This project aims to create a basic system that allows users to enter medicine names or symptoms and receive relevant safety information.

2. Objective of the Project:

(A) To create a simple medical assistant using Python.
(B) To detect possible interactions between commonly used medicines.
(C) To provide basic suggestions for common symptoms.
(D) To design a simple user interface where users can input information easily.

3. Tools and Technologies Used:

Tool
Purpose
Python
Programming language
Anvil
Web interface creation
VS code
Code editing
Dictionary data structure
Storing medicine interactions and symptoms

4. System Design / Methodology:

The system works in the following steps:

The user enters the names of two medicines or a symptom.
The program converts the input into lowercase for uniform comparison.
The system checks the stored dictionary database.
If a match is found, the program displays the interaction or suggestion.
If no match is found, a default safety message is shown.

flow:

User Input → Process Input → Search Dictionary → Display Result

5. Implementation:

A dictionary is used to store medicine interaction pairs.
Another dictionary stores symptoms and suggestions.
The program retrieves results using the get() method.
The interface is created using Anvil with input fields and buttons.

6. Code used:

from ._anvil_designer import MainFormTemplate
from anvil import *
import anvil.server


class MainForm(MainFormTemplate):

  def __init__(self, **properties):
    self.init_components(**properties)

  @handle("analyze_btn", "click")
  def analyze_btn_click(self, **event_args):

    name = self.name_box.text
    symptoms = self.symptom_box.text.lower()

    if symptoms == "":
      alert("Please enter symptoms")
      return

    result = anvil.server.call("analyze_symptoms", name, symptoms)
    user_symptoms = {

      "headache": "You may take paracetamol for mild headache. Stay hydrated and rest.",
      "fever": "Paracetamol or ibuprofen may help reduce fever. Drink plenty of fluids.",
      "cough": "Warm fluids and cough syrup may help. If cough persists, consult a doctor.",
      "cold": "Rest, hydration, and antihistamines may help relieve symptoms.",
      "stomach pain": "Avoid heavy foods. If severe pain occurs, consult a doctor.",
      "nausea": "Drink small amounts of water and avoid oily foods.",
      "dizziness": "Sit or lie down immediately and hydrate. If frequent, seek medical advice.",
      "sore throat": "Warm salt water gargles and lozenges may help.",
      "muscle pain": "Rest and mild pain relievers like ibuprofen may help.",
      "fatigue": "Ensure proper sleep, hydration, and balanced nutrition."}
    result= user_symptoms.get(symptoms) or "No Known Symptom, Please Consult a Doctor"
    

    

    self.result_box.text = result

  @handle("button_1","click")
  def button_1_click(self,**event_args):
    medicine_interactions = {("aspirin", "warfarin"):"Warning! High risk of bleeding.",
                             ("paracetamol","ibuprofen"):"Usually safe in normal doses.",
                             ("metformin","insulin"):"Monitor blood sugar level carefully",
                             ("aspirin", "ibuprofen"): " Ibuprofen may reduce aspirin's heart protection.",
                             ("warfarin", "ibuprofen"): " Increased risk of bleeding.",
                             ("warfarin", "paracetamol"): "Use cautiously. May increase bleeding risk if taken often.",
                             ("metformin", "alcohol"): " Can increase risk of lactic acidosis.",
                             ("insulin", "alcohol"): " Alcohol may cause low blood sugar.",
                             ("aspirin", "alcohol"): " Increased stomach bleeding risk.",
                             ("ibuprofen", "alcohol"): " May irritate stomach and cause ulcers.",
                             ("aspirin", "ibuprofen"): " Ibuprofen may reduce aspirin's heart protection.",
                             ("warfarin", "ibuprofen"): " Increased risk of bleeding.",
                             ("warfarin", "paracetamol"): "Use cautiously. May increase bleeding risk if taken often.",
                             ("metformin", "alcohol"): " Can increase risk of lactic acidosis.",
                             ("insulin", "alcohol"): " Alcohol may cause low blood sugar.",
                             ("aspirin", "alcohol"): " Increased stomach bleeding risk.",
                             ("ibuprofen", "alcohol"): " May irritate stomach and cause ulcers."}
                             
    med1= self.interaction_box_1.text.lower()
    med2= self.interaction_box_2.text.lower()
    result1= medicine_interactions.get((med1,med2)) or medicine_interactions.get((med2,med1)) or "No Known Interaction Found"
     
    self.result_1.text= result1

7. Advantages:

Easy to use interface
Provides quick medicine interaction information
Helps users understand common symptoms
Demonstrates basic AI-assisted decision support

8. Limitations:

Limited medicine database
Does not replace professional medical advice
Only supports predefined inputs.

9. Future Improvements:

Add a larger medicine database
Integrate real medical APIs
Use machine learning models for better predictions
Improve the website interface

10. Conclusion:

The AI-Driven Medical Safety Assistant successfully demonstrates how programming can be used to provide healthcare safety information. The project highlights the use of Python and web tools to build a simple yet useful system that helps users check medicine interactions and understand basic symptoms.